Can motor activity be considered a valuable biomarker for depression?

Depression is a widespread illness that affects people all around the world. It can induce a variety of symptoms such as loss of interest, psychomotor retardation, agitation and withdrawal from engagement in normal activities. Modern activity monitoring devices (actigraphs) allow for discreet tracking of physical activity, and can potentially be used as a mood indicator. In this study was investigated the idea of developing a biomarker capable of identifying a person affected by depression based on physical activity data. The study was conducted with data collected by digital actigraphy in patients with depression and compared it to one from a control sample with the purpose of investigating the associations between measured movement and the pathology. The daily motor activity has been employed to achieve this purpose. 32 controls and 23 conditions individuals wore an actiwatch that tracked wrist movement for several days. The difference between the two groups was assessed using motor activity mean values, within the 24h and then dividing them according to daily (23.00 - 06.00) and nightly (6.00 – 23.00) activity. An assessment was also made about the difference between day-time and night-time between the two groups. Possible correlation between the severity of depression and all the possible covariates were investigated. As ultimate step, several Machine Learning techniques were tested to see whether daily motor activity mean, standard deviation, and percentage of zero values, could be used to distinguish depressed patients from healthy ones. The motor activity in all the situation was found significantly lower in depression patients than control one, even in difference between day-time and night-time. A probably biased correlation between depression severity score and the fact that a patient were in or out the hospital was found. No other significant correlations were found. The Machine Learning approach showed the best classification performed by Logistic Regression, with an accuracy of 0.792 percent. These results suggest that motor activity recorded with activewatch is a potential biomarker for stratifying and classifying people with depression, highlighting differences in parameters arising from the activity. The Machine Learning approach has the potential to classify patients with a relevant accuracy. There is a need for more research to find correlation between the activity and the severity of depression index. For a future study, the difference between unipolar and bipolar sufferers may be explored in depth.
